---
layout: page
title: DH Portfolio
---

Hello, I’m Emily Mellen. When I started my PhD in Music at the University of Virginia, I came from a background in music history, especially pop musicology, music performance, and Arab music, as well as Arabic. At UVA, through my courses, I became even more engaged in the sociocultural and political dimensions of the study of music. I also went off on a tangent into postcolonial studies and anti-colonial theories and movements. Finally, through my coursework in different forms of media, I became interested in media history and particularly radio history.

I became engaged in the Digital Humanities as a way to make more public-facing scholarship. In particular, I became passionate about the potential for audio-based scholarship to open up alternative forms of communication for academic research. This was particularly applicable for my studies of sound and music. In some ways, I think it’s intuitive to want to work with sound when talking about sound, but I am also fascinated by how other kinds of scholars are using formats like podcasting or sonification of data as alternative means of communication. In general, I am interested in producing collaborative research that is accessible to the general public. With this goal in mind, I want to make my research available online (open access) and to incorporate sound, video, and images in its presentation.

In the 2018-19 Praxis fellowship program, we were tasked with creating a project around the entry of new works into the U.S. public domain for the first time in twenty years. Our final product, ***[Unclosure: An Act for the Encouragement of Learning](https://unclosure.scholarslab.org/)***, is a toolkit designed to help scholars learn about how they can use digital technologies to work with and to create sensorily stimulating digital interpretations and analyses of public domain works. We designed a series of models for this work using Robert Frost’s New Hampshire as an example text. In addition to collaborating to build the overall website, my primary intervention used Knight Lab’s Sound Cite to animate the text with recorded audio of students acting out one of the poems. This aspect of the project was something we decided not to include in the final version of the project and is not available to access from the website linked above. As a Praxis fellow, I gained valuable tangible skills in coding in Python and web design using Jekyll.

During and before my year as a Praxis Fellow, I completed several individual digital-minded projects. In Spring 2018, I took the course "Producing Ethnography" with Noel Loebley, who specializes in digital audio curation. One of the focuses of the course was to examine the potential for alternative media (especially film and audio) to present ethnography. My final project was a podcast which interspersed my own newly recorded analytic commentary with audio of a recorded conversation from an old ethnographic project that I did on bluegrass and old time music culture in Southwestern Virginia. In Fall 2018, I took the course “The ‘Black Voice’" with A.D. Carson, who does creative scholarly digital audio production. My final project was a proposal for a digital audio version of the text Cane by Jean Toomer, which would incorporate recordings of people from and located in the geographic areas of Cane voicing the text and their impressions. In Spring 2019, I took a class called “The Postcolonial Archive” with Maya Boutaghou. My final project was a proposal for a digital archive of the works of postcolonial scholar and novelist Assia Djebar. I considered how digital technologies have the potential to alleviate certain aspects of inequality of information and research access, while exacerbating other dynamics of power. I tried to chart out a way to think about digital archival that was also true to the ideology of postcolonial thought. 

In Summer 2019, I served as a graduate web development intern to reformulate the ***[Take Back the Archive](https://takeback.scholarslab.org/)*** (an archive of UVA’s history of sexual violence) website under the supervision of Jeremy Boggs. As a part of this internship, I built new pages, cleaned up old information, redid the front page and general visuals of the website, all using Omeka. I also cataloged images (gathered by undergrad interns) and created new galleries in Omeka to display them.

In Summer 2020, I served again as a graduate web development intern to design the ***[new website](https://segregation.virginia.edu)*** of ***UVA’s President’s Commission on the University in the Age of Segregation***. This involved participation in design meetings with the community and back end development of the structure and visuals of the website, as well as uploading content.

Since Summer 2021, I have worked with UVA’s Vice Provost’s Office for Global Affairs, serving first as a PhD+ intern, now communications assistant. As part of my work with them, I participated in discussions on the design of their ***[new website](https://global.virginia.edu/)*** as it was being designed and built. The website was built in Drupal and is run by CACS. Now that the website has been finished (or as finished as a website can be), I now maintain all the content on the website, in collaboration with communications officer Mandira Banerjee, including uploading and formatting written, audio, visual, and video content, reorganizing the structure of web pages, etc. I also record a podcast for Global Affairs called ***[Global Research Bytes](https://soundcloud.com/user-417140765)***. 

My dissertation, entitled ***Through the Waves: The Music of Radio Bari***, will take the form of a five-part audio essay, with visuals, presented on its own website, which I am in the process of building. Each dissertation “chapter” will form an audio episode of approximately 45 minutes in length. When you open the website, you will see a series of images that link to their respective audio segments. Along with this audio, there will be relevant maps, such as a map of the Mediterranean with Radio Bari’s transmission points (outside of Bari and from Rome) marked, as well as points where there is evidence that people listened to Radio Bari in the MENA region. Finally, there will be images from the archive on display. The maps and images will be displayed on the pages of their respective audio chapters and may be cued to scroll synchronized with the audio. Citations will also be available on the website and will be marked with an audio signal or a visual notation throughout the audio chapter. The project will be hosted on UVA Create while I am a student, and after I graduate I will transfer the project to Reclaim Hosting for a small fee, where the site will be hosted in perpetuity. I will also work with Sherry Lake (Libra) and Lauren Work in the UVA Library to develop a sustainability plan for the project to ensure that it is archived in a form that will remain publicly accessible. 

As I move forward following my PhD, the idea of public-facing scholarship is very attractive to me. I believe that my research could be interesting and even important to people outside of the academy, but I learned in my Praxis fellowship that making public-facing research is not as simple as uploading an academic paper to a website. I want to engage with the library community to better understand how to think about open-source publishing, particularly with audio. I also want to continue to contemplate the ethics of digital technology in scholarly research. In particular, I want to think about how critical theory, such as postcolonial theory or critical race theory, can be used to shape digital humanities projects. I hope to use digital publication, through blogs and open access journals, to keep my research accessible. I hope to use audio to make it interesting to a broad public. And, most importantly, I hope to use the collaborative, iterative process of digital project creation to keep my research in coalition and in dialogue with the relevant local communities of my research.

---
